Course Name: Food Microbiology And Food Safety
Module Name: Standard Methods for Microbiology Examination Food and Water
By Dr. Tejpal Dhewa, Central University Haryana, Mahendergarh

Hello everyone, our today's module is standard methods for microbiological examination of food and water. The main objective of this module is to aquire knowldge about standard micro biological procedures for analyzing food and water samples in food testing laboratories. The microorganisms in nature are found in water, soil, food, air, seawage and even on body surfaces. Hence, they are said to posses Ubiquitous charecteristics.
Qauntitative enumeration of microorganisms in food product is necessary for studying their physiology and safety towards food by analyzing milk, food, water and in some cases air. It is also required to determine the number of viable cells in food before consuming and for evaluating the food safety. Several methods such as, breed smears the serial dilution-agar plate method, the coulter counter, direct microscopic counts and chemical methods for estimating cell mass or cellular constitutents have been established.
Generally, enumeration of microbes is carried out to acquire following objectives: To be aware of these various techniques used for microbial counting in any sample. To differentiate among different enumeration techniques and learning the particular use of the technique. To know viable cell number in a given food for evaluating its safety.
In general, direct and indirect enumeration techniques are used for evaluation of the microbiological quality of food such as, SPC, coliform count, yeast and mold count, thermophilic and thermoduric, psychrotropic counts, pathogen detection are done by pour plating methods. PCR, RFLP, RAPD, ATP bioluminesence, RRT and MBRT are applied for qualitative as well as quantitative estimation of microbial load in various food.  
Various microbiological methods for evaluation of dairy food will be discussed and the subsequent results would be compared with microbiological standards of milk and milk products for pathogens as for the specification given by IS.Standard plate count is used for determining the total number of viable bacteria in milk products. This technique is based on hypothesis that each of microbes will trapped in or on a nutrient agar medium tend to multiply and produce a visible colony and the number of colonies, as result, will be computed as same as that of number of vaible cells inoculated into the medium.
It consists of mixing the appropriately diluted samples with a suitable nutrient agar medium in a Petri dish and Counting microbial colonies ranging from 30 to 300 develped after incubation at a specified temperature for a definite period. This method is widely used for assessing hygienic conditions of production, processing and handling. The estimates also helps in predicting the shelf life of the product and can also be used for grading of raw or processed dairy food.
For enumeration of coliforms in food products, the selective media such as violet red bile agar or MacConkey's agar is used, which contains bile salt. In the presence of bile salt, the coliform group can grow but, other microorganisms are inhibited. In this medium Crystal Violet cells as an inhibitor for gram-positive organisms. Preparation of double layer in case of pour plate technique suppresses the growth of aerobic organisms and also provides microaerophilic conditions in the medium. 
This selective medium provides the best medium for the enumeration of coliforms in different food product by using appropriate dilutions. Selective incubation period 24 to 48 hours and temperature 37°C and typical colony characteristics or acid or gas production. The result of coliform counts are generally expressed as cfu/ml or cfu/gram. Potato dextrose agar is a selective medium, used for the enumeration of yeast and molds. The use of potato extract promotes the growth of yeast and molds. Whereas low pH of the medium which is adjusted to 3.5 with 10% sterile tartaric acid that helps to render the growth of other bacteria while favouring the growth of yeast and molds.
Dye-reduction tests are still used to assess the overall bacteriological quality of raw milk. These tests are rapid simple and inexpensive, moreover, only viable cell can reduce the dyes actively. However, all organisms cannot reduce the dyes equally. Also, it cannot be applied directly to food samples containing reductive enzymes. The flurozenic and chromozenic substrates can be used to see these color changes. The Methylene blue reduction test is based on the fact that the color imparted to milk by addition of dye that is methylene blue tend to disappear more or less quickly.
During bacterial metabolism, removal of dissolved oxygen from milk takes place and the reducing substances formed are responsible for the color change. Bacteria, that are mostly aerobic in nature are responsible for consuming the oxygen during the growth. Here, it is assumed that the greater the number of bacteria present in milk, the oxygen consumption will be quicker, and hence, the color will disappear fast. Therefore, the time of reduction is taken as measure of the number of microorganisms in milk. Although, it is more likely to be truly a major of metabolic reactions happening at the cell surface of the bacteria. The Methelene blue Reduction test has a correlation with other bacterial procedures like SPC, therefore, it has a significant role in determining the microbial population. This is particularly true in those sample showing widespread multiplication of the psychotropic species. 
The results can be compared with this table: One-Hour Resazurin Reduction test: The resazurine undergoes reduction through a series of color change unlike methylene blue. For example, blue, purple and lavender, pink before completely getting reduced to colorless. Resazurin dye is blue at the oxidation reduction potential of +0.3 volts. When the redox potential reduces to +0.2 volts, it undergoes a change to pink color compound that is resorufin, which is irreversible. Further, when the redox potential is reduced to +0.1 volts or less, the color of dye changes to colorless, which is a reversible reaction. Usually, the degree of reduction of dye is measured in the presence of oxygen, after a fixed time of incubation of milk sample. The reduction of dye to a particular shade of color is dependent upon the extent of reduction of oxygen by metabolic activity of microbes. The color change is measured with the help of a Lovibond color comparator disc or a standard resazurin disc. 
And the results can be interpreted by using this standard table: The presence of thermoduric and thermophilic bacteria in milk are the indicators of unhygenic conditions, which are generally associated with wrong practices and the use of unclean utensils and equipment. Thermoduric bacteria are largely non-spore-forming, sometimes may include some spore-forming bacteria. They are heat resistant types, generally, growing on surfaces on ineffectively washed or improperly sanitized utensils on farms; in preheating equipment operated at favorable growth temperature in processing plants, and on inadequately sanitized pasteurizing equipment. The Thermophilic bacteria are spore-forming growing at a optimum temperature of about 55°C, and their presence in milk in largely numbers indicates of long exposure to pasteurization temperature or in some instances, to other unsanitary practices. Contamination with this species is due to several wrong practices followed in Dairy Industries like re-pasteurization of milk, prolonged holding of milk or cream in vats at pasteurization temperature, long-flow holders or vats for more than 2 hours without periodic flushing out equipment with hot water. Continuous use of preheaters, and growth of thermophiles in milk residues on the surfaces of pasteurizing equipments.
Contamination with psychrophiles which are cold-loving bacteria in properly pasteurized milk may originate in water supplies used for rinsing equipment or with residuce or poorly sanitized equipment and containers, and subsequent growth of such contamination, psychrophilic bacteria in dairy procucts may be detected and the relative numbers determined by incubating plates at 5°C for 7 Days after plating samples.
As the production of milk powder involves high heat treatment, that is why, most of the micro organism present in milk are likely to be destroyed during drying except for a few highly resistant organisms particularly sporeformers. The number of microorganisms present in the finished food product that is dried milk and infant food may be high due to the use of poor quality milk, inadequate heat treatment, and poor sanitation practices.
Although, frozen conditions of ice-cream do not provide a favorable medium for growth of microorganisms, it is likely to harbor many types of organisms which may be due to contaminated cream, milk powder, stabilizer, sugar and other ingredients used in the mix and recontamination of the sterile equipment and containers. Some tests required for microbiological quality of ice-cream are Standard Plate Count, Coliform count and Yeast and mold count.
Since, butter is prepared from pasteurized cream, the presence of coliform bacteria in butter is more reliable index of improper pasteurization or contamination during manufacturing or packaging. Similarly, the presence of a large number of yeast and molds in butter indicates the poor sanitary conditions of manufacturing, packaging and storage.
Some tests required are Standard Plate Count, Coliform counts and Yeast and mold count. Condensed milk are likely to contain several types of microorganisms. In sweetened condensed milk due to the high concentration of sugar that is about 45%, only a few species, yeast and molds, in particular, will be able to grow and bring about its spoilage.
Some tests are required that Standard Plate Count, Caliform count, and Yeast and mold count. The quality of fermented milk products is likely to be seriously impaired if unwanted microorganisms like coliforms, yeast, molds, sporeformers gain entry during the manufacturing process either from milk starter, unsterile equipment and unsterile environments and unhygienic handling by human beings. These products are more prone to yeast and mold contamination as being favored by the acidic environment for their growth. When such organism present in appreciable numbers which indicates unsanitory conditions of manufacturing.
Dahi is the most popular lactic fermented Indian curd, prepared by inoculating milk with either pure or mixed culture of lactic acid bacteria. Dahi is microbiologically examined for the presence of unwanted microorganisms mainly coliform yeast and mold, by serial dilution plating method on selective media. Lactobacilli/ Lactococci count: The specific lactic  acid bacterial count per gram of the fermented products shall not be less than 10,00,000 cfu/gram when determined according to the method prescribed by IS 12899:1989 which is a probiotic product containing live microorganisms.
Yogurt is prepared with inoculating a mixed culture of Streptococcus thermophilus and Lactobacillus delbrueckii subspecies bulgaricus with high solid that is about 14 to 18% total solid and popular in western countries. To obtain better product, it is advice to maintain a ratio of rods is to cocci 1:1. It is usually examined microscopically, to check the proportion of these two organisms. This product is also check for the presence of contaminants Manly coliforms, yeast and molds.
The cultured buttermilk is produced by souring skim milk with  missophilic lactoccoci and leuconostocs, which produce mild sour taste with acidity generally ranging from 0.8 to 0.9% lactic acid and give typical diacetyl flavor. Then, incubated at 28 to 30°C most preferablly as it gives a proper balance of acid producers and aroma producers in the product. This product is also examined for contaminants like Dahi and yogurt.
Probiotic Dahi/lassi is prepared with probiotic lactic cultures, can be tested for contaminants like coliform, yeast and molds as like Dahi and yogurt. Cheese is a cogulated fermented dairy product which involves two distinct steps of the process: primary preparation of cheese curd and secondary ripening or curing process. Starter cultures in cheese making mainly include lactic acid bacteria, non-lactic acid bacteria, yeast and mold.
Manufacturing hygiene is essential for ensuring consistent quality and public health safety. Therefore, routine process monitoring of cheese, presumptive coliforms, aerobic and anaerobic spore former presence and yeast and mold population density are examined routinely. Test for veggies like potato, cabbage; fruits like orange, tomato and bakery products like bread, biscuits:  Standard Plate Count, coliform and yeast and mold counts are required to be examined. Most probable number test is more likely to be using a statistical technique which determine low counts of coliform bacteria in dairy products.
Three sets of three or five tubes are prepared, each containing a sterile medium and inoculated from each of three consecutive, 10-fold dilutions. Tubes are showing bacterial growth after incubation are considered positive. As per the MPN table, in each set of three or five tubes, the MPN of bacteria are counted per unit of sample, from the number of positive tubes. Only the result from thre consicutive dilutions are important when more than three dilutions are made.
The highest dilution giving positive results in all of the tubes, and the next two succeeding high dilution, should be choosen. When the weight or volume of sample in first dilution is 10 or 100 times less than the weight or volume listed in MPN table, then the count tabled will be in multiplied by 10 and 100, respectively. The membrane filtration technique was introduced for the microbiological analysis of water samples, as an alternative to the MPN procedure in the late 1950's. The concentration of larger samples on a membrane filter is a main benefit of the technique over the MPN procedure, as well as the pour plate and spread plate techniques. 
A 100ml sample is passed through a 47mm membrane using a filter funnel and vacuum system in Membrane Filter Technique. Any organisms present in the sample will be concentrated on the surface of the membrane. The filter is then placed in a Petri dish which is containing a nutrient medium. The passage of nutrient through the filter facilitates the growth of microorganisms on the upper surface of the membrane. This distinct colonies are forming on the surface of the membrane then, can be easily transfer to the confirmation media.
Some important microbiological methods for enumeration of food pathogens are IMVic test, that is used to differentiate between Enterococcus species and E.coli. There are four reactions indole test, methyl Red test, Voges ProsKauer test, Citrate utilization test. Determination of incidence of E.coli in a coliform population is many-a-times required, since other than the other genera and species renowned, E.coli is more indicative of fecal contamination.
IMVic reactions are commonly employed in the identification of members of family enterobacteriaceae, and they are set of four useful reactions. These reactions are Indole test, Methyle Red test, Voges Proskauer test and Citrate utilization test. 
Indole test: bacteria can produce indole from amino acid tryptophan using the enzyme tryptophanase. Production of indole is detected using Enrlich's reagent or Kovac's reagent. Indole reacts with the aldehyde in the reagent to give a red color. An alcoholic layer concentrates the red color as a ring at the top. E.coli giving positive result, and klebsiella pneumoniae is giving negative result in this case.
Methyl red test: It is also called MR test. This is to detect the ability of an organism to produce and maintain stable acid and product from glucose fermentation. Some bacteria produce large amounts of acid from glucose fermentation, that they have overcome the buffering action of the system. Methyle Red is a pH indicator which remains red at a pH of 4.4 or less. E.coli is positive, klebsiella pneumoniae is negative in this case. Voges Proskauer or VP test: While MR test is useful in detecting mixed acid producers, VP test detects butylene glycol producers.
Acetyl-methyl carbinol is an intermediate in the production of butylene glycol. In this test two reagents, 40% KOH and Alpha-naphthol are added to test broth after incubation and exposed to atmospheric oxygen. If acetoin is present, it is oxidized in the presence of air and KOH to diacetyl. Diacetyl then reacts with guanidine components of peptone, in the presence of alfa -naphthol to produce a red color. Role of alpha-naphthol is that of a catalyst and a color intensifier. E.coli is negative and klebsella positive in this test.
The citrate utilization test detects the ability of an organism to utilize citrate as the sole source of carbon and energy. Bacteria are inoculated on a medium containing sodium citrate and a pH indicator bromothymol blue. The medium also contains inorganic ammonium salts which is utilized as a sole source of nitrogen. Utilisation of citrate involoves an engime citerates which breaks down citrate to oxoloacetate and acetate. Oxoloacetate is further broken down to pyruvate and carbon dioxide. Production of sodium carbonate as well as ammonia from utilisation of sodium citrate and ammonium salt respectively. 
Results in alkaline pH: This results in a change of the medium's color from green to blue. Staphylococcus aureus is aerobic, Gram-positive cocci in clusters. They usually, but not always produce golden yellow colored colonies on nutrient agar and blood agar, and shiny black colonies with or without narrow gray-white margin when grown on Baird-Parker medium. Fecal streptococci is aerobic, Gram-positive cocci usually in pairs or short chains, producing small pink colonies on MacConkey agar and colonies which are dark red or having red or pink centers when grown on ethyle voilet azide dextrose agar. Growth is also obtained at 44°C.
Enumeration of salmonella: Salmonella is short, gram-negative, facultatively anaerobic, rod-shaped bacteria. Almost all members of the genus of gram-negative enteric bacteria are considered to human pathogens. Although, Salmonella is seldom associated with mastitis, some species can inhabit in the udder and be shed in milk at level upto 2000 organisms per ml. Salmonella may be present in small numbers and are often accompanied by considerably large numbers of many other members of enterobacteriaceae other families. Considering this selective enrichment is carried out necessarily. Moreover, pre-enrichment is a must for allowing detection of Salmonella that is injured. Pre-enrichment of the sample in a non-selective medium is necessary, for repairing of injured cells, mostly in lactose broth, followed by 18-24 hours of incubation at 35°C. There are two different selective enrichment media that are  Selenite cystine and Tetrathionate broth used for Salmonella. These media are inoculated from the pre-enrichment broth and incubated followed by streaking on agar plates of Xylose Lysine  Desoxycholate, Hektoen Enteric and Bismuth sulfite agar from both selective and enrichment broths and incubated for 24 hours to 48 hours at 35°C for selective isolation of Salmonella.
TSI agar slant method is also used to identify these cultures. The TSI agar slope surface is streaked, and butt is stabbed and incubated at 35 to 37°C for 24 hours. The changes are interpreted in the medium as per the table: Typical Sallmonella culture show alkline slant with gas formation and acid butts. Within about 90% of cases formation of hydrogen sulphide that is blackening of the agar.
Listeria monocytogenes is a gram-positive facultatively anaerobic non spore-forming rod-shaped short depthoride like bacterium that occur singly or in short chians. Listeria monocytogenes is kind of an intracellular pathogen and effects healthy as well as immunosuppressed populations. This organism can cause gastroenteritis and fever in healthy individuals.
The confirmation of Listeria monocytogenes is performed by Haemolysis test. If the physiological and morphological characteristics along with catalase reaction are indicative of listeria species, the Sheep blood agar plates are inoculated to determine the haemolytic reaction. A seperated colony is taken and stabbed using wire from each culture, along with positive and negative culture. 
After incubation at 35 to 37°C for 24-Hour, the test strains are examined. Listeria monocytogenes show narrow, clear, light zone, that is also called beta hemolysis and Listeria innocua show no clear zone around the stab. Enumeration techniques are in use since years aiming to obtain the correct recognition of the microbes present in food samples for ensuring food safety. Advanced and rapid techniques are needed to be developed to determine the microbial quality of dairy food.
Antibiotic residues is a big concern for the next generation. Therefore, antibiotic residues in food products are required to be determined routinely. Detection of  pathogenic microbes and prevention of disease through foodborne and food ingested microbes are very important to safeguard the food. Novel and rapid techniques or experimental protocol should be developed to establish the methods for detection of emerging foodborne pathogens in the future, using molecular and biotechnological approaches.