Course Name: Food Microbiology And Food Safety
Module Name: Extrensic factors affecting microbial growth and survival in food
By Dr. Tejpal Dhewa, Central University Haryana, Mahendergarh

Hello everyone, our today's module is Extrensic factors affecting microbial growth and survival in food. In this module, we will understand how external or environmental factors affect microbial growth and survival in diverse food environment. The growth of microorganisms in food can be affected by several factors present inside the food or the outside environment, where food is kept. These factors play an important role in understanding the growth of microorganisms in food, and by these factors we may know, how to keep our food safe for conception. Such information is also helpful in designing better condition for preserving food products for a longer peroid, without losing the nutritional values. In general extrensic factors are factors in the surroundings and external to the food, that affects both microorganisms and food itself, during processing, handling and storage.
Extrinsic factors affecting the growth of microorganisms in food are storage temperature, relative humidity, gases and activities of other nearby microorganisms. Diverse microorganisms grow over a wide range of temperature. For example, some microorganisms prefer to grow in the cold, i.e., in low temperature, few at room temperature, and other to grow at high temperature. While the growth rate increases with rising temperature, the growth rate tends to decline rapidly after that, until the temperature maximum is achieved. Both low and high temperatures, may affect the rate of microbial growth. At low temperatures microbial growth ceases, because of slower reaction rate for individual enzymes, and at low temperature there is a decrease in fluidity of the cytoplasmic membrane which affect its transport mechanisms. At high temperatures there is a denaturing of structural cell components as well as, inactivation of heat sensitive enzymes which may occur.
Food and food products are exposed to different temperatures from time of production, until the time of consumption. The microbial growth is accomplished through enzymatic reaction, which is depended on temperature. Every 10°C rise, doubles the catalytic rate of enzyme, and every 10°C decrease, reduces it to half. Normally, all microorganisms have a defined temperature range in which they grow. Actually, the temperature range over which, a microorganism grows that reflects the temperature at which it's enzymes function. So, within this range three cardinal temperatures can be identified minimum, optimum and maximum temperatures. Based on temperature requirements for microbial growth, microorganisms may be placed into three groups psychrophiles, misophiles and thermophiles. 
Psychrophiles are those microorganisms that grow well at or below 7°C, and have their optimum between 20°C and 30°C. These organisms grow well at refrigerator temperatures, and responsible for spoilage of meat, fish, poultry, eggs and many other food, normally, stored at this temperature. For example, genera of belonging Pseudomonas, Enterococcus and others such as, Alcaligenes, Shewanella, Corynebacterium, Lactobacillus, Pseudomonas, Psychrobacter, Enterococcus etc.
Mesophiles are those microorganisms that can grow well between 20°C and 45°C with optima between 30°C and 40°C. These type of microorganism may be found in food stored at refrigerator temperatures. In fact, they do not grow at this temperature but do grow at temperatures falls in the mesophilic range, depending on other suitable conditions. It has been observed that, Enterococcus faecalis can grow over a range from 0°C and 30°C or above. 
Thermophiles are able to grow well at and above 45°C with Optima between 55°C and 65°C. For Example, Bacillus and Clostridium, the Genera belong to this group are of great interest to the food microbiologist and dairy food technologist in the canning industry. Besides bacteria, interestingly, yeast and molds can grow over a wide range of pH, osmotic pressure and nutrient content. Likewise, also able to grow over wide ranges of temperature. Although, yeasts can grow over the psychotropic and mesophilic temperature ranges but usually, not within the thermophilic range. 
Numerous molds can grow at refrigerator temperature, especially some strains of Aspergillus, Cladosporium and Thamnidium which may be found growing on eggs, sides of beef and fruits stored at low temperature. Hence, the temperature of storage is most important parameter, that affect the growth of microorganisms and their survival in food. Microbial growth at food surfaces also affected by the humidity of storage environment. If we store food in a dry atmosphere i.e., less-humidity, microorganisms are less able to grow than if the food is stored in a moist environment, where high humidity exist. 
That is why, dry conditions are considered better for storing food then moist conditions. In general, there is a great interaction in between the water activity of food and relative humidity of the storage environment. It is important to note that, if the water activity of a food is set at 0.65 it must be stored under conditions of relative humidity that do not allow the food to capture moisture from the air, and thereby increase its own Surface and subsurface water activity to a point where microbial growth may occur.
There is always an equilibrium in between water activity of food and relative humidity of the environment. For example, if food with low water activity values are kept in environment high relative humidity, in such condition, the food pickup or capture moisture until, equilibrium has been established. Similarly food with a high water activity lose moisture when placed in an environment of low relative humidity. Temperature is also affecting the relative humidity of the environment, so we should be careful while selecting proper storage environment for food. If higher the temperature is higher than the relative humidity will be lower and vice versa.
Aerobic microorganisms require oxygen for their growth. For example, E.Coli is a fecal bacterium which grows readily in many food. If food is stored in a reduced oxygen environment, then aerobic bacteria would not be able to grow and reproduce. In contrast, there are few microorganisms, that can grow in absence of oxygen called anaerobic microorganism. The best example of anaerobic microorganism is Clostridium Botulinum which causes Botulisum.
Microbial growth is affected by gases with two mechanisms called Direct effect and Indirect effect. Direct effect: Some gases such as carbon dioxide, ozone and oxygen directly toxic to certain microorganisms that can inhibit growth and proliferation. Their potential is dependent upon the chemical and physical properties of the gas and its interaction with an aqueous and lipid phases of the food. An oxidizing radicals generated by ozone and oxygen are highly toxic to anaerobic and aerobic bacteria depending on their concentration. For example, carbon dioxide is effective against obligate aerobes and at high-level it can prevent the growth of other microorganisms.
Indirect effect: Such type of effects are exerted by altering the ecology of microbial environment, in which gas composition is modified. For example, replacement of oxygen by nitrogen. As soon as the surrounding atmosphere is changed, the competitive environment is also modified. Thus, atmosphere that have a negative effect on the growth of one particular microorganism may promote the growth of another microorganism, which is called positive effect. This effect may have positive or negative consequences depending upon the native pathogenic microflora and their types and the nature of the substrate.
Several newer technologies are in practice to inhibit the growth of microorganisms and most of these are based on temperature to enhance the inhibitory effects. It has been noted that controlled atmosphere and modified atmosphere packaging of certain food which can significantly enhance their shelf-life.
Normally, the inhibitory effect of carbon dioxide increase with decreasing temperature due to the increase solubility of carbon dioxide at a lower temperature. The pH of food becomes lower, after the dissolution of carbon dioxide. In general, nitrogen being an inert gas mainly used to displace oxygen in food package either alone or in combination with other gases like carbon dioxide. Hence, showing an indirect inhibitory effect on the growth of aerobic microorganisms.
Some microorganisms produce secondary metabolites such as, antibiotics, bacteriosins, hydrogen peroxide and organic acids which are either inhibitory or lethal to other microorganisms. Nowadays, this cidal or killing effect of some food microflora on others is well known. Substances produced by one microorganism either kills or inhibits the other organisms is an example of microbial interference or microbial antagonism. Many scientists studied microbial interferences; Sir Howard Florey, who gave some examples of interference back to Pasteur and Joubert in 1877. Before the 1960s, such type of work has been done by clinical researchers. Later on, in the same 1960s, some food microbiologist showed their interest in this work.
Dack and Lippitz, noted that the natural flora of frozen pot pies kills inoculated cells of staphylococcus aureus, E.coli and salmonella typhimurium. The microbial interference are of three types: competitive exclusion, replacement therapy and lactic antagonism. The potential of microbial growth in food is determined by the food environment and the environment where food is stored. Intrinsic factors are the parameters related to the food itself such as, nutrient, water activity, pH,redox potential and oxygen. While, Extrinsic factors are the environmental conditions where food is kept such as, storage temperature, related humidity, gaseous environment and the activity of other nearby microorganism plays, a significant role in the multiplication of microbial cells.