In a bizarre incident in Uttar Pradesh's Jaunpur district , an egg challenge cost a man dear as he had to pay with his life, police said on Monday.The deceased was identified as Subhash Yadav (42).Police said that Yadav had accompanied his friend to the Bibiganj market area to eat eggs but suddenly an argument broke out between the two and they decided on a challenge of Rs 2,000 for eating 50 eggs.Subhash accepted the bet and began eating eggs. He ate 41 eggs and just when he started eating the 42nd egg, he collapsed and fell unconscious.The local people rushed him to the district hospital from where he was referred to the Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences. He died hours later.While the doctors claimed that Subhash died due to over-eating, the family members refused to comment on the incident, police added.This story is from December 26, 2019

After a long time there was a wedding in the Khan family of Kanpur's Bakarganj. Their 25-year-old daughter, Zeenat, was to tie the knot with Hasnain Farooquee from Pratapgarh. But on the morning of December 21, the groom called to say he didn’t know how to get his baraat to the curfew-hit area. There was violence and panic in the city and he was worried. Hours earlier, two youths had died in anti-Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) protests in the vicinity and police and paramilitary had swooped down on the area. That made matters worse.After the phone conversation with Hasnain ended, Zeenat’s paternal uncle Wajid Fazal turned to the family and wondered if the festivities should stop for the time being. The elders sat in a huddle. No one had any clue what to do next. Word spread and their neighbour Vimal Chapadiya heard of the Khans' plight. He knew he had to do something. Chapadiya soon got along two friends, Somnath Tiwari and Neeraj Tiwari, and spoke to Hasnain. "Don't worry," he told the young man. "We will escort the baraat the entire time to ensure their safety."In the evening, 70 baraatis arrived at Bakarganj Chauraha in cars and a mini-bus. Once they stepped down, 50-odd Hindus led by Chapadiya formed a human chain around them and took them to the wedding venue, a km away.“Vimal and his friends ensured that the baraat were fine. They even stayed back until the bidai (departure of the bride),” Fazal told TOI on Wednesday as Zeenat, who had returned to pay her family a visit, smiled. The first thing she did upon reaching her house was to go and look for ‘Vimal bhaiya’. She thanked him and sought his blessings for her married life.“I didn’t get a wink of sleep in the days leading up to my marriage," said Zeenat, who lost her father when she was 12. "A wedding scheduled in the area had been cancelled as the groom’s family refused to come since the situation was so tense. That morning, when my uncle received the call, I had given up all hope that my wedding would take place. Without Vimal bhaiya’s intervention, the baraat would not have reached here. He came like a farishta (angel) in my life.”Chapadiya, who works as an administrator in a private school, said that he merely did what he felt was right. “I have seen Zeenat grow up. She is like my younger sister. How could I let her heart be broken? We are neighbours and I had to stand with the family in times of distress," he said.This story is from October 29, 2019

Researchers at the International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad (IIIT-H) have created the first-ever Indian Brain Atlas. The study has revealed that the Indian brain, on an average, is smaller in height, width and volume when compared to Western and other eastern populations. This will help in early diagnosis of Alzheimer’s and other brain-related ailments.The research has been published in Neurology India , a peer-reviewed journal.Jayanthi Sivaswamy of the Centre for Visual Information Technology, who worked on the project, said that the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) template, which is used as the standard, was created using Caucasian brains. This, according to the researchers, is not ideal to analyse brain differences in the Indian population.“As Indian brains are smaller in size when compared to MNI, the difference in scans can look alarming and lead to misdiagnosis,” Jayanthi told TOI. She added that MRI images are compared with pre-loaded MNI template to arrive at a diagnosis. “There is clear evidence based on the study that it is desirable to build a larger atlas as it is important to understand structurally what is normal. This would help catch several brain conditions early on.”Jayanthi said that even Chinese and Korean brain templates had been constructed, but there was no corresponding template for the India-specific population. She said that the first attempt by the IIIT-H team at creating an India-specific atlas involved 50 individuals, evenly balanced out across genders.“MRI scans of these subjects’ brains were taken at three different hospitals across three different scanners to rule out variations in scanning machines. Emboldened by the results of the pilot study, we went on to recruit 100 willing participants in the eventual construction of the atlas, referred to as IBA 100,” she added.Jayanthi said that the atlas was validated against other atlases for various populations. “These differences in height, width, and volume are found even at the structural level , such as in the volume of the hippocampus and so on. But overall, IBA 100 is more comparable with Chinese and Korean atlases than the distant Caucasian one (MNI),” she said.She added that her team is currently focussing on understanding the aging process. “There are many changes that take place in a brain due to advancing age, with the most typical one being atrophy, shrinking of structures,” She also added that this will help in diagnosing dementia or Alzheimers as they are associated with atrophy of the hippocampus.The cryptocurrency market has a long-standing reputation for being highly volatile, and rightly so, given that prices can fluctuate upto 30% within a single day. However, like any other market, traders and analysts have discovered certain patterns that could be used to predict an imminent spike in valuations.

A Gwalior youth, 20, engrossed in his mobile phone playing PUBG game , gulped acid while mistaking it for water and died on-board a Delhi-bound train, just 45 minutes before it reached Agra Cantonment station. Saurabh Yadav was travelling with his friend, Santosh Sharma, 24, a silversmith who was carrying in his backpack a bottle of acid used in cleaning ornaments. Sharma was later booked by railway police.According to Sharma, his friend was absorbed in the game when he rummaged into his bag and pulled out the bottle of acid and gulped the chemical, thinking it to be water. They had boarded Swarna Jayanti Express from Gwalior and were heading to Agra when the incident took place on Tuesday afternoon.“I was on upper berth, while Yadav was on the lower. He was watching video over phone and eating snacks with headphone plugged into his ears. He mistakenly took out the chemical bottle instead of water bottle from my backpack and drank it. With the first sip, he realized his mistake as he suffered from burning sensation. He immediately called me for help,” Sharma said.At the time of the incident, the train was between Morena and Dholpur. It reached Agra Cantonment at 3:23PM, but Yadav was dead by then. Railway doctors who were kept at standby after alert from the express train guard declared him dead.Station house officer (SHO) of Agra Cantonment, Vijay Kumar, said, “Victim’s friend Santosh Sharma claimed that he had pulled train chain before Dholpur station for medical help. But the train guard, S K Choubey, after taking cognizance of the situation, continued with the journey for Agra which was 45 minutes away.”When contacted, Choubey said, “The chain was pulled after Dholpur station. I immediately met the victim and alerted Dholpur station master for help. But, since the train could not be taken back, it was decided to immediately travel to Agra for medical assistance. The medical team was kept on standby mode after my alert.”Ankush Goel, senior divisional operational manager of Agra division, concurred with train guard claims and said, “Railway records show that alarm chain was pulled at 2:40 pm between Dholpur and Mania station. Since Agra was the only station with better medical facility, guard took a call for further journey.”Meanwhile, GRP Agra Cantonment booked victim’s friend Sharma under IPC sections 304 (punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder) based on the written complaint of victim’s father Pritam Yadav.“During the questioning, the silversmith claimed that he was carrying the chemical in his backpack for cleaning of silver metal. He had some work in Agra and the victim had accompanied him just for the fun,” the SHO said.The two-year cycle will see 9 of the 12 Test playing countries in action.

Each team will play Test series against six of the other eight teams, with each series consisting of 2-5 matches.

While all the teams will not be playing the same number of matches, they will all play six series (three home and three away) each. A maximum of 120 points is there for the taking for every team from each series.

At the end of the league phase, the two teams with the maximum number of points will qualify for the final.

The Championship will culminate with a final at Lord's in England in June 2021.

The World Cup hangover is over and it's now time for a new battle. The inaugural edition of the World Test Championship will kick off with the upcoming Ashes series from August 1 in Edgbaston. India, too, will be part of the first leg of the Championship, when they clash against the West Indies, while Sri Lanka will take on New Zealand at home as part of the Championship.Here are the salient points of the format of the World Test Championship, a series which the ICC is hoping will see fans find renewed interest in the longest format of the sport:Test series, with different number of matches will have different points systems. Here's the proposed points system for the Test Championship:The Ashes, starting August 1, will be the first bilateral series under the World Test Championship banner. The Test Championship will also be the first Test series where players will sport jersey numbers on their shirts.It has been learnt that most of the Indian players will opt for their limited-overs jersey numbers in the Test series against the West Indies.India will overall play 6 Test series as part of the Championship. Since there is no bilateral cricket being played with Pakistan, there won't be any series against the neighbours as part of the Championship.Here is India's schedule for the World Test Championship:Following a two-year trial, the ICC has also approved concussion substitutes in international cricket. The rule will be effective from the Ashes series.Also, International cricket captains will no longer run the risk of being suspended for slow over-rates with the ICC deciding to instead dock points and fine the entire side for any such violations, starting with the World Test Championship.Another smartphone brand is set to enter smart TV segment in India -- Nokia. The company is set to foray in the TV market in India in partnership with e-commerce giant Flipkart. The e-tailer made the announcement last week. Nokia's entry in the segment follows that of OnePlus and Motorola, both of whom launched their TVs in India last month.Now new details have emerged about the upcoming smart TV. As per sources, the TV will come in 50 inch-plus size. It is likely to sport 4K ultra-HD panel. The LED TV is said to run on Android 9.0 operating system and support Google Play Store.Sources also revealed that Nokia smart TV will come with Intelligent Dimming technology. Somewhat similar to local dimming or micro dimming, the technology is said to tackle darks and lights in relatively better way. The technology is said to result in better contrast and deep Black levels. In another words, it optimises picture contrast quality in real time to offer better contrast.The Nokia smart TV is likely to launch in early December.As per earlier revealed details about the upcoming TV, it will come with sound by JBL by Harman.Flipkart has entered into a strategic relationship with Nokia that gives it the right to use Nokia brand for smart TVs in India. Interestingly, Flipkart also has its own smart TV range under its private label, MarQ by Flipkart.In a statement, Flipkart also said that as part of the government's 'Make in India' initiative, it will facilitate the manufacturing and distribution of Nokia branded smart TVs as well as manage end-to-end sales to create thousands of new jobs.This story is from December 29, 2019

Saturday saw Delhi’s coldest December night in six years, and Met officials say Sunday might break an older record. With the mercury already down to 2.4°C at the Safdarjung observatory, just a whisker separates it from the 2.3-degree mark set on December 11, 1996.While Safdarjung is Delhi’s official record-keeper, lower temperatures were recorded at three other centres on Saturday night. Mungeshpur in northwest Delhi was the coldest at 1.4 degrees and even Lodhi Road recorded 1.7 degrees.It’s still a long way from Delhi’s all-time December low of 0 degrees, recorded in 1930, but a record spell of cold and severely cold days has left the city frozen stiff.Severe cold or cold day conditions have prevailed over Delhi and NCR since December 14, beating the 13-day run recorded in 1997,” a Met official said, adding that Saturday also witnessed a “cold wave” as the minimum temperature fell below 4°C, and Sunday might be colder.Not just nights, Delhi’s days have also been punishingly cold for the past fortnight. On Saturday, Safdarjung recorded a maximum of 13.3 degrees, 7 below normal.The Met office considers it a “severe cold” day when the minimum temperature falls below 10°C and the maximum is at least 6.4 degrees below normal. It’s a “cold day” if the day temperature is at least 4.4 degrees below normal.A cold wave warning is issued when the minimum is at least 4.4 degrees below normal or breaches the 4-degree mark. Saturday also saw “very dense” fog at Palam that reduced visibility to zero in the morning, and Safdarjung had “dense fog” with visibility down to 100 metres. Two flights were cancelled, six were diverted and 400-500 were delayed.An airport official said pilots in the morning hours operated under CAT-IIIB conditions, meaning the runway visual range was 50-175 metres. This December is on course to be the NCR’s second-coldest since 1901. The mean maximum temperature (MMT) till December 28 has been 19.2°Celsius.The lowest MMT of 17.3 degrees was recorded in 1997. On Thursday, the Met had issued an orange alert — cold day or severe cold day conditions, and dense night and morning fog — for Delhi, Punjab, Haryana and West UP till December 29.It has forecast a mainly clear sky on Sunday, with dense to very dense fog in the morning. Severe cold day and cold wave to severe cold wave conditions are expected at most places while the maximum and minimum temperatures will be around 14 and 2°C, respectively.Similar conditions are expected on Monday. The weather is expected to change from Tuesday evening under the influence of an approaching western disturbance and easterly winds. Light rain is expected from late night on December 31 to January 2, and hailstorms are also expected on January 1 and 2.In Video: Delhi records its lowest temperature of season at 1.7 degreesThis story is from November 2, 2019

Telecom regulator Trai on Friday fixed 30 seconds as ring time for mobile phones and 60 seconds for landlines, putting at rest the battle among Bharti Airtel, Reliance Jio and Vodafone Idea.There was no such limit for calls within India till now and telecom operators on their own were reducing incoming call ring time to attract reverse call from subscribers of other networks as shorter rings meant more missed calls.“The time duration of alert for an incoming voice call, which is neither answered nor rejected by the called party, shall be 30 seconds for cellular mobile telephone service and 60 seconds for basic telephone service,” Trai said in an amendment to quality of service norms for basic telephone and cellular mobile telephone services.Earlier, both Bharti Airtel and Vodafone had alleged that Jio had slashed ring time of calls from its network to 20 seconds in some circles to elicit call-backs because shorter rings meant more missed calls. Executives from the companies alleged that by doing so, Jio was trying to manipulate the interconnect usage charges (IUC), which is a net revenue generator for the telco receiving more calls.While Jio reacted to its rivals’ protests by increasing ring time to 25 seconds, industry sources said that as a retort, both Airtel and Vodafone Idea cut their own ring time to 25 seconds. Jio, however, said that 15-20 seconds was a global norm and its network was being inundated by missed calls originating from other telcos as it offered free voice services.This story is from October 31, 2019

Isro chairman K Sivan in June this year had said: “We don’t want to be part of ISS. Our station, which will be set up in five to seven years, won’t be very big”

The Indian Space Station , which the Indian Space Research Organisation plans to put in place in five to seven years, will have space for three astronauts, sources told TOI.The space station will be an extension of the human spaceflight programme Gaganyaan. TOI has learned that the initial designs for the space station – still in a nascent stage – suggest a 20-tonne modular abode in the low earth orbit (LEO), at an altitude of 120km to 140km.The International Space Station (ISS), jointly managed by the US, Russia, Europe, Japan and Canada, orbits at an average altitude of 400km. Announcing the project in June this year, Isro chairman K Sivan had said: “We don’t want to be part of ISS. Our station, which will be set up in five to seven years, won’t be very big.”A space station, with its zero-gravity environment and exposure to space, provides a unique laboratory for scientific research that is difficult to be replicated on Earth. That cells and chemicals behave in a different way in space enables scientists to study variant behaviours and their applications. Some of the major experiments being conducted at ISS include those on Parkinson’s disease and resistance of cancer cells to chemotherapy. Research in space have applications also in material development, disaster relief, food and water conservation and waste management.Much of this, however, will depend on the success of Gaganyaan, which envisages sending three Indian astronauts to space and bringing them back in the same crew module in 2022. Isro plans to use technologies from Gaganyaan for the space station. These include orbital module, life-support system and human-rated launch vehicles for space station programme.Isro has been working on space docking technology, which is key to manned space missions, for three years. The technology, for which the department of space has earmarked Rs 10crore, will allow transfer of humans from one vehicle or spacecraft to another and refuel spacecraft. Isro is likely to conduct a docking experiment next year.Isro officials said private firms will be part of the space station programme. “They will make significant contributions,” said a scientist. Sivan had earlier said that Gaganyaan will include participation from about 650 industries.This story is from July 2, 2019

The city witnessed extremely heavy rains all through Monday night. As per IMD Sant Cruz observatory the rain recorded over a 24 hour period ending 8.30am today has been 375.2mm which falls in the extremely heavy rain category. It is the second highest rains recorded in a 24 hour period in the last 44 years. The highest rainfall in this period was during the July 26, 2005 deluge of 944mm.Meanwhile, IMD Colaba obseravtory recorded 137.8mm of rains and adjoining areas like Dahanu 192.8mm. In Thane in the last 24 hours (till 08.30am) 220.42mm rainfall was recorded.The Thane Regional Disaster Management Cell received around 94 complaints in these 24 hours. There were around 13 tree falls and three branch falls. Also waterlogging was observed in 45 areas like Kopri colony, Hiranandani Estate, outside Thane mental hospital, Manisha Nagar in Kalwa etc.Shubhangi Bhute, scientist from the IMD Mumbai observatory said that while heavy to very heavy rains were witnessed all through last night, some pockets recorded extremely heavy rains. "This was owing to a well marked low pressure area over Bay of Bengal and also a cyclonic circulation," she said. The IMD has forecast intermitent heavy showers for Mumbai for Tuesday as well.Winds are expected to be westerly to southwesterly with speed of 40-50kmph temporarily reaching to 60kmph in gusts/squall. Sea will be moderate to rough with westerly to southwesterly waves. Fishermen have hence been advised not to venture into sea off north Maharashtra coast and open sea during next 48 hours.