Analysis of Errors by Automatic POS tagging:

	Some of the most common tags which were not correctly tagged by the automatic tagger we used [NLTK]

	1. UH -- interjections were not correctly identified by the tagger. 
			
			[might be tagged as nouns because the tagger might have thought that they are names and if they were nouns would be correct]

		a) Hello Everyone -- tagged as NNP
		b) Okay , it is a kind of a dead end -- tagged as NN
		c) Sorry , I was wrong -- tagged as NN

	2. CD -- numbers were not tagged as CD
			
			[considering the fact that the word ten is placed in the neighbourhood of aux. verbs the tagger might have tagged them as NN]

		a) That means that it is ten -- tagges as VBN
		b) The value is between minus ten and  ten -- tagged as VB
		c) I have already told you that ten is the solution -- tagged as VBP

	3. NN -- nouns were tagges as adjectives
			
			[All the three are nouns which are places before nouns so the tagger tagged them as adjectives]

		a) IIIT-H have created the first-ever brain atlas -- tagged as JJ
		b) She thanked him and sought blessings for her married life -- tagged as JJ
		c) Word spread and their neighbour Vimal Chatopadhyaya heard of the Khans -- tagged as JJ

	4. VB -- words which should be tagged as VB were tagged wrong 
			
			[]

		a) The differnce in scans can lead to alarming and lead to misdiagnosis -- tagges as JJ
		b) There was no corresponding template for India-specific population -- tagged as JJ
		c) He has a bottle of acid used for cleaning ornaments -- tagged as NN

	5. VBG -- tagged differently from VBG
			
			[The error might have been caused due to the presence of nouns in the neighbourhood of verbs and also a main verb in the sentence]

		a) They used traditional methods for preseving food like cooking, baking and smoking. --- All three were tagged as NN
		b) U.S patent for preseving food in tin cans granted -- tagged as IN
		c) Food is not always considered safe for human beings -- tagged as JJ
		d) Minimize the risk of food poisoning and to make food safe for eating -- tagged as NN

	6. IN -- tagged wrongly
			
			[might be a logical misplacement of templates due to positions of verbs and nouns in their neighbourhood,  because they are direct prepositions]

		a) Chemical and biological agent which can minimize the risk of food poisoning  -- tagged as NN
		b) this makes food safe for drinking and eating -- tagged as JJ
		c) These programs are preventive in nature and are implemented by experienced professionals. -- tagged as VBN

