Course Name: Food Microbiology And Food Safety
Module Name: Food Preservation And Significance
By Dr. Tejpal Dhewa, Central University Haryana, Mahendergarh

Hello everyone, our today's module is Food preservation and significance. The main objective of this module is to understand the principles of food preservation and their importance in preserving various food.
In the recent past, we observed that several food such as fruits and vegetables were not available throughout the year. But nowadays, this trend is going to change because civilized human adopted and also developed some techniques to preserve the seasonal food without affecting their texture, flavor, color and nutrition. The practice of preserving food is called food preservation. 
Although, some techniques were in practice from the ages, recently few modern technologies have been globally adopted for preserving food. These advanced techniques play a vital role in modern Life.
Food preservation is a science that focuses on the process of preventing decay or spoilage of food by preventing or inhibiting the growth of microorganisms along with retarding the oxidation of fats, which causes rancidity, and thus allowing the food to be stored in a safe condition for later use. In another words, we can describe it as a condition in which food may be kept safe and nutritious over a period, without being contaminated by microorganisms or chemicals.
Food technologist develop some simple and effective techniques for preserving food like preserving of fruits, sugaring and sealing. Preserving of fruits prapairing jam by boiling, which reduces its moisture content, that subsequently destroys the contaminating microorganisms. Sugaring for preventing re-growth of microorganisms And Sealing is an airtight jar, which prevents recontamination of the microorganisms.
Key principles are involved in preserving foods that are preventing or delaying of microbial decomposition in food, that can be achived by keeping out microorganisms, also known as asepsis, which can be accomplished by covering food, packaging or removing the spoiled food. It can be achieved by removing microorganism, the removal of microorganisms from food can be achieved through filtration, centrifugation, washing and trimming.
Filtration is an efficient method for removing microorganisms completely, but its use is limited to clearing liquids only such as juices, soft drinks, alcoholic beverages and water. Centrifugation also called sedimentaion, usually, not a very effective method for removing microorganisms completly, however, it is used in the treatment of water to be intended for drinking purpose. Washing mailny used for raw food for removing soil microorganisms from the surfaces, and trimming used for discarding this spoiled part of food, best suitable for fruits and vegetable.
It can be achived by interfering with the growth and metabolic activities of microorganism.
It could be achived by drying, maintaining anaerobic conditions, storing at low temperature and adding approved chemicals in food.
It can also be achived by killing the microorganism, which accomplished by high temperature or use of heat or radiation.
It can be achieved by destructing or inactivating the enzymes of food by blanching.
And By preventing or delaying the chemical reaction of food by adding of certain antioxidant to food.
And last, preventing the damages due to pests and chemical causes.
The most conventional techniques for preserving food that was in practice or even in present times are presented in this slide, Certain traditional methods such as drying, freezing and fermenting of food are still in practice due to their popularity and cost-efficiency in food preservation, inspite of few shortcomings.
Drying and fermentation: In the process of drying, water is removed by evaporation from food. In general, this process is applied to the final step of production before packaging and marketing of the products. The main purpose of drying is to reduce or moderate the water activity of the food to prevent the growth of microbial contaminents that respire aerobically. The drying of food does not fully prevent microbial contamination. Moreover, it changes the physical property of the food product.
The common technologies for drying various food are sun drying, solar drying, oven drying and freeze drying. Both refrigeration and freezing have played a significant role in the preservation of food products. At low temperature, microbial activity becomes reduced and hence, food can be stored and easily transported from one place to another. Though, sometimes more persistent microorganisms can unavoidably contaminate refrigerated or frozen foods during storage or transportation.
Canning and bottling for preserving food: Canning and bottling remian a very common and ancient technique, where food is cooked, sealed inside a sterile container under asceptic conditions and later boil to eliminate remaining microorganisms if any. Such technique is considered as one of the most efficient techiniques of the food preservation, through which we can keep the food edible form, for a few years. An even Freeze-dried canned products such as dreid lentils can remain upto 30 years in an edible form. However, canned food remains vulnerable to an anaerobic microbial growth.
The use of preservatives in food has expanded enormously in the recent years. Food preservatives are the substances added to food products for inhibiting, retarding or arresting the process of fermentation, acidification and decomposition. The preservatives added to food products keep them safe, for longer duration without spoiling.
In general, food preservatives can be classified into two classes based on their sources. Class I preservatives or the natural preservatives: These are the substances which occurs naturally. Hence, can be used at home without any restriction. There is no need to be cautious in while using them, for example, salt, sugar, alcohol, vinegar, syrup, spices, edible oil and honey are the  example of this category.
Second, class II preservatives or the chemical preservatives: These are the synthetic chemical substances, and hence, the risk is associated with this kind of preservatives. Therefore, their use is restricted. Although they can be used in limited quantity with all necessary precautions. For example, benzoates, sorbates, nitrites and nitrates of the sodium potassium, sulfite, glutamates, glycerides., these are few examples of this class of chemicals.
There are three main categories of preservatives. category I: antimicrobial, catergory II: anti-oxidants and in Category III: anti-enzymatic. In category I, antimicrobial which destroy or delay the growth of microorganisms examples include nitrites, nitrates, sulfur dioxide, benzoates and sorbates. Nitrites and nitrates prevent botulism in meat products. Sulfur dioxide prevents further degradation in beer and wine and fruit. Sorbet and benzoates-antifungal used in jams, salad, cheese and pickles.
Antioxidants, slow or stop the breakdown of fats and oils present in food that occurs in the presence of oxygen leading to rancidity. The examples, BHT, BHA,vitamin E and sulfites. Butylated hydroxyanisole used in butter, lard, meats, beer, backed goods, snacks, potato chips, nut products, dry mix for beverages. BHT is used in fats and oils.Sulfites is for beer, wine and dried food. And vitamin E is for fruits and vegetables.
Catergory III, anti-enzymatic: they can block the enzymatic processes such as ripening, which is occurring in foodstuff even after harvesting. The most common examples are Erythrobic acid and citric acid. Both acid stop the action of enzyme phenolase that leads to a brown color on the exposed surface of freshly cut fruit or potatoes.
Irradiation and chemical additives are one of the advanced and most widely used methods for preserving food. Though, such techniques are presently in practice and predicted to expand more. In the irradiation process food is exposed to ionizing radiations, which can alter the microbial DNA without affecting the quality of food. Selctive targeting of irradiation to microbes gain large public interest.
In this process gama rays or high-speed electrons are used to destroy microorganisms. The unit of radiation absorbed in the rad, which is equivalent to the energy absorption of 100 ergs per gram. Irradiation process is also termed as cold sterilization because one million rad will increase the temperature of food by about 2°C. The low-level irradiation prevents the germination in potatoes, onions and carrots, delaying ripening by controlling metabolic processes. Irradiation can make pork and beef free of tapeworms and trichenella and checked heavy losses in the granary due to insect infestation.
Besides, so many advantages of irradiation over the conventional methods. However, it's use to food for human consumption needs several authorization regarding helpfulness. Although, the irradiation unwraps the possibility to process different types of food in unlimited quantities, it requires specific infrastructure and construction, which make it a bit expensive. Unfortunately, most of the consumers are radiation-phobic, and they overlook the positive results of this process. Therefore, such consumers are not willing to purchase anything which is irradiated.
Another process to preserve the freshness of food is by using certain chemicals. According to new finding it has been revealed that even the most susceptable food like ham, pepperoni sandwiches, can be prepared using chemicals. Researchers reported that by using certain chemicals in the food like sandwich, didn't allow multiplication and spreading of the microorganism which can harm freshness and texture of food in spite of retaining oxygen and moisture in it.
High pressure processing is potentially a safe and revolutionary method for preserving food and sterlizing food or food product processed under very high pressure. During this process, in the food certain microorganisms and enzymes get inactivated. This techinique is also called as pascalization, in which more than 50,000 pounds per square inch pressure may be applied for a period Of 15 minutes that leads to an inactivation of microorganisms. Simply, during this process, all chemical activities of the microorganisms, which play a vital role in the spoilage of food, come to an end. Pascalization occurs at low temperature without using any food additives.
Significance of food preservation: The production of food and its supply do not always tally according to the need of population. Unfortunately, in some regions supply of food product is insufficient, while others have excess production. Certain foods such as juicy fruits, leafy vegetable, mangoes, tomato, banana, papaya etc. quickly get spolied. Hence, for improving shelf-life of food it is necessary to increase infrastructure for proper storage and preservation of food.
That is why, it is necessary to introduce the continuous innovation in food preservation techniques for controlling of the growth of contaminating microorganisms in effective and more efficient ways. There is a number of methods are available for storing food such as conventional preservation process including drying and salting. Modern Advanced Techniques including irradiation and high-pressure preservation of food. These type of preservation practices are very helpful in agriculture and food industries, armed forces, to a great extent the survival of many developing countries, as they increase the shelf-life of food with numerous benefits.
Moreover, modern food preservation techniques are not only helping to enhance longitivity of food products, but also maintaining desirable nutritional qualities. Researchers indicated that, with these modern techniques of food preservation like high pressure processing and newly-designed packaging materials, food remains fresh and edible even for a period of 7 to 8 years.
The shelf-life of food products and their supply can be increased by preserving food using appropriate techniques. Even perishable food like meat, fish, fruit and vegetable can be stored for a long period of time without changing their nutritional value, and these food products can be marketed worldwide. Besides, preservation also helps in stabilizing market prices of food product, due to the less scope of shortage of supply to demand. Proper storage and supply of food product as per consumers demand increases gross income in the agriculture sector.
Preservation also adds diversity to the food such as making the seasonal food available throughout the year. By the help of preservation during the hot summer months, in the absence of a freah peas, dehydrated or canned peas may be prepared. Canned or dehydrated food can be easily stored and transported from one place to another, as compared to fresh or raw food.
Every vegetable, fruits etc. cannot grow in every country due to the adverse environmental conditions. To overcome dietary shortage and  nutritional inadequacy, The Preserve food products can be in imported as per the need of consumers. Therefore, such practices not only adds variety in their diet but also helpful in managing nutritional deficiency of the population. For example, dates and dry fruits are exported from the Gulf countries to worldwide. In the same way, some regions of the country which may lack a particular food product can be obtained from other regions, where it is produced in excess, such as in the ice-bound areas of Himalaya regions food is obtained from the other part of the country. Thus, we can say by food preserving some problems like, food shortage and famine can be avoided.
By preserving food using adequate methods, certain perishable food like vegetables and fruits can be consumed after few days of harvesting. Thus, such practices are also helpful in decreasing food wastage by preventing them from decay or spoilage. Moreover, excess food may also be preserved for later use otherwise, such food would have been wasted.
As preserved food have already been partially processed, therefore save time by reducing preparation time and energy. Food preservation has developed from, a simple process like salting into more complex and efficient preserving methods like irradiation and use of chemical additives. By preserving of food with adequate techniques, we can increase the shelf-life and supply of food, availability of seasonal food throughout the year, decrease dietary shortage, decrease food wastage, and decrease the preparation time and energy.