Welcome friends to seventh module of AI. We will be discussing problems with search methods and solutions in this particular module. We have seen so many search methods. We have seen unguided search methods, we have seen guided access methods we have seen search methods which were generic which we have used… We have talked about search methods which we have used in recent times like variable descent and simulated annealing and all that.

Though we, the search methods are quite good, there are some problems with these search methods. Sometimes a designer has to deal with those problems additionally. We'll be discussing about them right now. One important problem, one typical problem that every search method has to deal with is called the… the type of heuristic function. Some heuristic functions only look at the local values and give you decision based on those local values. Sometimes that result into local maxima. Compared to that some other heuristic functions are quite global in the sense that you… you give a heuristic value which is globally correct. In that sense you don't fall into local maxima, you just reach to goal.  We'll look at one typical example here and then we'll move on to other cases. A lot of other problems for example, whether the search is assisted human… by human or not, whether the… the search method is… is it's to be interrupted to be, you require to interact with that search method and so on so forth. 

So this… this particular module is about those problems and… and some solutions to them, okay. But anyway you… they are not general problems. You may encounter them you may not encounter them based on the problems that you're dealing with. Okay let us begin. Okay the first thing we need to change or modify search methods to adapt to situations. Not every situation is the same not every problem looks… is similar you need to adapt… You need to tune you need to adjust to it. Okay and the first thing is dependency on heuristic function which I've already told you. Okay…you, the other problem is whether you… you need to provide explanation. Now search method, now that that's one more problem. See if search method is traveling in a direction and gets a solution for example… 

